2017-05-07-Proposal-Q3-Phage

experiment ideas: 
populations act as experimental replicates
freeze every couple of generations
what is the path that it took?

DNA versus RNA: 6 DNA phages and 6 RNA phages
8 double-stranded DNA: Mu, T5, T7, u80, lambda, R17, MS2, P2
8 RNA: Enterobacteria phages MS2 and GA, F1 and QB, M, and Pseudomonas phages Φ6, PRR1, PP7 
RNA phylogeny (Krishnamurthy et al. 2016)
DNA: choose phylogenetic pairs and distributed across slope (log mortality rate vs log(multiplication rate))

multiple time points: 24; 48; 72? 12; 24; 48?
multiple phages: can we get them to shift along trade off line?
at the end, measure how long they can survive outside the cell? (decay rate)
multiple bacteria hosts

many populations to observe convergent substitutions: or are multiple proteins altered to produce same trade-off? 

Brandons paper:

Life-history theory predicts that traits for survival and reproduction cannot be simultaneously maximized in evolving populations. selection for improved between-host survival during transmission may lead to evolution of decreased within-host reproduction

we observed that delayed transmission selected for improved extracellular survival, which traded-off with lowered viral fecundity (slower exponential population growth and smaller mean plaque size); improved virion stability was gained via independent mutations in various VSV structural proteins.

RNA viruses can evolve different molecular solutions for enhanced survival despite their limited genetic architecture, but suffer generalized reproductive trade-offs that limit overall fitness gains.

other references: 
Stearns 1989
Ewald 1987, 1993, 1994
ogbunugafor et al 2013
De Paepe and Taddei 2006
Elena 2001
Charnov 1997 (trade offs; Nature)

I would like to combine the experimental design of De Paepe and Taddei 2006 and Wasik et al. 2014 to a) determine if a survival-reproduction trade-off still remains in multiple species of phages after altering the timing-of-transmission and b) to infer phenotype-genotype associations. 

Phage stability is very dependent on salt concentration and osmotic pressure [19]; so we used the standard high-salt LB broth instead of any defined medium that could favor one phage over another.

Questions: 
Does the phylogenetic closeness of ssRNA phages confound things?
Is 24 h cell culture passage 'ordinary' for bacteriophages? Does it vary?
How often should fitness characteristics (decay rate) be measured?
 
Brandons input:
- Test ecological question: two populations; saw a host every 24 hours; every 48 hours – survive outside of a host; is it evolvable – what are the trade offs? 
- Evolvable – response to selection? Distribution of phenotypes to select upon? (no variation in number of heads; can’t select on); read up  
- Phages – niche breadth/evolution of virulence work; learn biology; how does host density (no evolutionary energy into maintenance) – when is this favored in my system?
- Design experimental evolution: choice between survival and reproduction – environment makes you choose to do one well; can you tweak 

PHAGE INFO:

PhiX174 belongs to the Microviridae family of bacteriophages (12). It is a small, icosahedral, nontailed virus with a circular single-stranded DNA
the replication of PhiX174 DNA can be supported by different Escherichia coli strains and distantly related bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (28). These findings imply that the limiting step for PhiX174 infection is entry and not replication or lysis. The commonly used PhiX174 host is the laboratory-derived strain E. coli C, which has a specific rough lipopolysaccharide (LPS) recognized as the receptor (13).

